A few definitions, to act as a glossary / common vocabulary:

FX rates are quoted for pairs of currencies, the base currency and the term currency (normally written as base/term). The quote gives the value of 1 unit of the base currency in the term currency. For example, if a GBP/USD rate is 1.9995 then 1 GBP (pound) may be exchanged for 1.9995 USD (dollars). Most currencies are conventionally quoted with the dollar as the base currency (eg USD/JPY), with a few exceptions (like the pound). Quotes can sometimes be presented in non-market convention.

The rate quoted often depends on the (maximum) amount to be traded; this amount is normally specified in the base currency, but it is legitimate to specify it in the term currency. The currency in which the amount is specified is the dealt currency, while the other currency is the contra currency. (Sometimes the amount currency changes between quote and acceptance; this is known as dealing on the contra.)

A cross rate can refer to any rate where neither currency is the dollar (because historically such currency pairs were illiquid, and transactions were priced as if the base currency were first converted to dollars and then to the term currency). More generally it is possible to take any two rates with a common currency and cross them to produce a third rate - e.g. if GBP/USD is 2.0000 and EUR/GBP is 0.80000 then EUR/USD is 1.6000. This computation (which can involve multiplying or dividing depending on the way the inputs are quoted) is also sometimes referred as triangulation, although a triangle also refers to a set of currencies related in this way all of which have a liquid market. There may not be a strong market convention for which way round a cross rate is quoted, especially when exotic currencies are involved.

Market rates are rates from other parties in the FX market, usually obtained via a market data feed or electronic trading system. They may be indicative, meaning they are simply a statement by some party of roughly where the rate is, or tradeable meaning that at least one other party is entitled to trade on it. (Screened rates are ones that we can trade on, because we have established credit with the other party; unscreened rates may not be tradeable by us.) Depth of book indicates how large a trade can be executed on a tradeable rate.

Rates by convention are quoted to 5 significant figures (EUR/GBP is quoted to 4.5 significant figures - the last digit is either 0 or 5). This is also known as market precision. High precision rates are those that are quoted more precisely than this - usually a single extra digit is provided, although for internal purposes we may use much higher precision than this. One pip (or one tick) is defined as 1 in the least significant digit.

Normally rates are quoted as a spot rate. A deal agreed at this rate will be settled on the spot date - roughly two working days later. The settlement date or value date is when the money is transferred; the trade date is when the deal is agreed. Days in this sense usually end at 5 pm New York time.

If a deal is to be settled on something other than the spot date then a different rate will be quoted. The difference between the spot rate and the outright or all in rate for a value date is known as the forward points. These are normally quoted as a (possibly fractional) number of pips, and may be positive or negative. For example if the spot rate is 1.9995 and the forward points are -3 then the outright rate is 1.9992. (Forward points are determined by the interest rate differential between the two currencies, which is why they are sourced from the interest rate traders on the IR desk.)

Rates (and forward points) are typically quoted as a pair - bid and ask (also known as offer). The bid is the price that we will pay, and the ask is the price that we require to be paid (which is never smaller). The mid point is the mean of the two, and the spread is the difference. Spreads can be as small as a single pip. (One of the motivations for high precision rates is to allow even smaller spreads.) The spread is where our profit is made - clients would like very tight spreads, we would like very wide spreads. Spreads are wider for larger amounts, since more risk is involved. An aggressive price is one where the spread is small; a defensive price has a wider spread.

A swap is a trade where the agreement is to buy a currency is on one date and then sell it back on another date (or vice versa). Normally the swap is even, meaning that the same amount is traded on both dates, but uneven swaps may also be agreed. (Note: more correctly an even swap is one where the net present value (NPV) of the two amounts is the same, so that the trade has a net effect of zero at spot.) The two dates involved are called the near date and the far date. Often the near date is the spot date; if it isn't (and neither is the far leg) then the deal is a forward forward. The same spot rate is used for both legs of a swap, so the important information is the forward points for each leg. The overall price of a swap can be summarised as the swap points - the far bid minus the near ask, and the far ask minus the near bid.

The two parts of a swap deal are called legs. The idea can be extended to deals which specify an arbitrary number of legs (multi-leg trades); the key point is that either all are traded or none.

Some clients will only be given one sided quotes - they have to specify whether they are buying or selling before receiving either a bid or ask quote. This means the spread is concealed (and usually larger).

Daily rates are quotes (which may be indicative or tradeable) that are valid for an entire day. These normally have very large spreads, but are useful for organisations acting as bureaux de change.

Trader rates are rates quoted by our traders. These may be automatically generated (using defined algorithms for determining the current mid point and the appropriate spread) or manually overridden (either on a per-quote basis or systematically). Traders derive their profit from the spread.

Client rates are rates that we actually give to our clients. They are derived from trader rates by adding a markup - typically widening the spread. Markup is usually specified as either a number of pips or a percentage of the rate. Sales advisers derive their profit from the markup. In some cases a negative markup may be specified (as a loss-leader). A fixed-width spread may also be guaranteed to the client, which can cause negative markup (a loss limit may be applied in this case).